Welcome to the second PBC morning dawn study group from Padmasamy Ling. Today we'll be discussing
the second chapter of Venerable Khenpo Rinpoches book, The Buddhist Path, and the chapter is
entitled "The Causes and Conditions of the Mind." So first we'll do some opening prayers
together and then we'll go into that chapter.
[music]
[Singing]
[silence]
So I'll just begin by giving a brief overview of the chapter and so what we'll do is, so
we all have the same context to say more or less the essential point of each chapter,
or sorry, each paragraph in this chapter. And then after that we'll have these, we'll kind
of begin to discuss these four main points that we've outlined to talk about. So the
first chapter is making a vision between a grasping duality mind, and they say our nature
is perfect and complete, and in order to remove this grasping and reveal this nature, we have
to work with our body, speech, and mind. So our body, speech, and mind can either be positive,
negative, or neutral, and so the practice is to have our body, speech, and mind be positive
as opposed to negative and neutral. And then the third paragraph is that the mind is
principle, and that we should check this for ourselves. Before a moment of speech, in a
moment of body, there's always a previous instant of mind. Fourthly, the tool to make
our body, speech, and mind positive always is mindfulness. Fifth, the mind is always
thinking about me and mine. And so it's important for us to investigate this mind that's thinking
about me and mine. And so Urbiches begins this by considering the relationship between
mind and body, by asking does mind come from body, does mind come from these five elements,
or does body come from mind? Then they go on to say that I, the sense of I, is nothing
but grasping. So what is this grasping? The grasping is the mind. So then they go on to
discuss, well does the mind rely on the body? And they answer, no. Does the mind come from
speech? That's a ninth paragraph. And they again say no. And so then the question becomes,
well let's investigate thoughts. Let's look at this mind itself. And so then they go to
analyze, well this present thought that is happening now, it comes from a past thought.
And so the question is, well is this, so in this present thought if we look at it, does
it have a cause or not? And if it does not have a cause, then this present thought would
have to be permanent. So they deduce that this present thought must have a cause, and
this present thought comes from the previous instant, which comes from the previous minute,
hour, day, year, all the way down to the moment that we're born. So then that takes us to
the twelfth paragraph, and they say well how did we develop as a baby? How were we born?
And so here they say that the mind was the principle cause of us being born, and the
supportive conditions, the supportive causes were the two elements of our parents coming
in. And so this draws the conclusion that this life that we're in now will eventually
turn to death, will die, and that after death there will be a period of this after death
bardo. Following that will be a new life, which will then end again and have an after
life experience bardo. And so this is a constant cycle that we've all been going through.
And so this is the reasoning behind past and future lives and Buddhism. Then they say that
this duality mind will continue this way until enlightenment happens, and that non-grasping
enlightened awareness will be fully revealed at that point, and then once this grasping
is removed, once this enlightened awareness is fully revealed, then we'll never be forced
by karma to take rebirth again. They go on to kind of continue to tease out the logic
of this karma for life and to death by showing how when we look at things that causes produce
similar results. If we look at results they come from similar causes. That goes for both
physical causes, making physical results, and mental causes producing mental results.
And that understanding about this system of cause and result is exactly what brings inner
wisdom. So then they go on to say that one day we will die, and understanding how our
mind and body interact will actually greatly help us when our body dies. And then just
stubbornly believing that nothing happens after death is just that, stubborn belief
about something that we don't know. Then the 19th paragraph is that when the body stops
or dies the mind continues, so they go on to talking about the eight consciousnesses that
make up the mind. And that these eight minds or consciousnesses have habitual tendencies,
and that these habitual tendencies happen even without a body, and the example that
we can think of is it in a dream. Then the 21st paragraph, the habitual mind is forced
to reincarnate due to its habitual energy, due to its habits, and that this non-grasping
awareness isn't forced to do anything, so it arises spontaneously in a way that's
most beneficial for helping others. And following that, just as knowing emptiness is not the
same thing as actually realizing emptiness. Similarly, having a map is not the same thing
as actually traveling to and arriving at our destination. And so then they say, well what
is it that causes this rebirth again? It is our grasping. And that this emptiness nature
or dependent origination is in fact what allows things to change, and this grasping is actually
what refuses to see this. Then ignorance is what blocks our true nature from fully functioning,
and then based on this ignorance, we don't see the infinite flexibility of our body and
our mind. And then also, then we don't see the natural qualities of that mind rising,
so we don't see our own qualities of Buddha nature happening. And this is likened to
hearing and darkness, and that if we continue this ignorance, we'll never be peaceful because
we won't have a balanced mind and we'll constantly be tossed around on the waves of our karma,
so this samsara. And so then the final paragraph, they go on to emphasize that ignorance itself
is temporary and can be removed, that this is an important point to really take to heart,
and that by understanding the cause and effect of ignorance and wisdom, that by understanding
this cause and effect will become enlightened. And so another way to say this is by understanding
the Four Noble Truths, the cause of samsara and its resolve, and nirvana and its cause,
then we'll eventually become enlightened. And that's the chapter in a very bullet-pointed
way, so beginning there. So then we'll go to this first topic, and you read that on the
journal? Yes. Meditation practice reveals our true nature as being totally perfect and complete.
However, present in an illusory and temporary way, we are incomplete. Although we have many
good qualities, we also have many obstacles. In order to reveal this completeness, the most
important things to work with are the body, speech, and mind. In Buddhism, these three
aspects are called the three doors. Along with the three doors, we cling to other dualistic
labels, like he and she and I and you. Of all our concepts, the notions of having body,
speech, and mind are always with us. So if we can make their activities positive, then
we are performing dharmic activity. If we do not have the ability to make our body, speech,
and mind positive, then we are in either a neutral or a negative state. Anybody have
any thoughts? It's like you've seen some things you see that you don't make a judgment either
way. Would that be something similar to a samadhi, or could a samadhi have a neutral
state of mind, or just the act of samadhi cultivating that one-plenty of concentration,
or a similar state? Is that by its nature positive? I don't think it would be so much
as if, generally, a samadhi would be concentrating the mind. I think working with the body, speech,
and mind as a virtuous activity would be cultivating samadhi based on a good motivation, and then
neutral might be sitting in a chair. It's neutral. Clonically, it's neutral. It's not
like, "I am going to sit in a chair for a," so anyway. Walking down the street, looking
up, or like seeing, or going, coming to the conclusion that you can't affect something
in a positive or a negative way, and by stepping back from it and realizing that you don't
have any influence on that. It might be positive, though. Are you talking about more of an apathy
point of view? Is that something you're saying? Not necessarily apathy, but just the realization
of being aware of the situation, and that you don't have an effect on it either way,
positive or negative. Realizing that your input wouldn't be valuable in that situation,
so stepping back because you're a neutral influence. Sometimes that could be skillful
means. I think, according to the teachings, usually when I say neutral, it's like sitting
in a chair, walking, something that doesn't have a strong, volitional action that's either
positive or negative. It seems like that's something. That's a nice neutral activity.
That's completely unique. And I think something too that also affects karma is how aware we
are at what we're doing, and how we feel about what we're doing, and then how we feel while
we're doing it, and how we feel once we've finished doing that. So that also could go
with neutral to a certain extent, too. But then, in regards to this, what do you all think
about as far as how this positive activity relates to some of the other points in the
chapter? Like I'm thinking about karma, and the neutral and negative.
Do you have a thought that maybe is positive or negative that creates karma just as much
as, less than or more than, doing something specifically with your body itself? I'm curious
to hear what people think about that.
From what I've heard, I think on one level you would say that mind is what happens first.
I mean, that's what happens before speech and action or body. But I've also heard that
once you've acted, you've decided to say something to someone, you've been thinking
about it, and you decide to say it, then that's stronger that you actually said it, so the
speech, or whether it's an action, I think that's considered more karmically effectual
as a stronger effect.
If we always have this body-speech and mind, that maximally using that would be the best.
Positive mind, positive speech, positive body. And in that moment, as much as we can be,
all of our things, all of our, we're fully activated in a positive direction, and all
of these body-speech and mind are coordinated with one another.
So it's an integration of all of those, and being here and mindful of that. Because something
may come in your mind, for instance, you may be angry. And you may not act on that, you
may not say something to somebody, you may not do anything specifically, or you might.
So if it's in your mind and then it comes up as part of Buddhist practice, you're mindful
of that, and then you have an impact on that before it turns into something else. But there's
still a karmic impact. The anger still has arisen.
Well, it's not as great, I wish I had.
And that's what I'm getting at, because is it karmically more or less, or does it even
matter whether you have a thought, maybe you don't do that, and then you turn that thought
on? I think if you do it, if you do something about it, that makes the karmic propensity
stronger. But if you don't act on it, you still have to work on the mental piece, but
it's not, in terms of karma over time.
Because karma is activity, the word is activity, isn't it?
It's activity, yeah. But then also the sense of result, cause and result, results and causes
and causes and results, and one thing leads to another.
Would you explain those four aspects of karma that you went through?
Like the object, the attention.
So is that related or one more time? Yeah, it's just related. And then too, also
with what Doug's saying too, and how we kind of touch on that point of the 12 links, but
definitely our karma is also how we're perceiving things, and then how we label them, how we
think about them, everything we relate back. So that's one level that's happening in the
mind level. And then there's our tendency to grasp at that, whether it's just actually
grasping at the thought, but then of course when we then also engage with our speech and
or our body to somehow try to interact with that and deepen that grasping, then that is
perpetuating further seats of results. Like what we're experiencing, what's coming up
to us is the results of previous things that have been sown kind of seats coming out, reflecting
back out from deep within our consciousness. And then how we then try to, this whole process
of grasping is what perpetuates it. So it's happening on the level of our mind, on just
the level of perception in a way and conception, and then of course then how we relate to our
body and our speech in regard to those things. And then the Buddha said in regards to those
four points is what makes a karmic activity more or less powerful is how we are aware
of it, we are in the first place, like if we think about practice or anything, we think
about it and we're aware we're going to do it. And then if thinking about doing it we
have like a desire to do it or not do it, how we feel about doing that is also adding
to the karmic. And then how we feel and where our mind is while we're doing it is another
thing that's making it stronger. And then once we've done the activity how we feel about
doing it makes it more or less strong too. So for instance if we see something and we
have a really strong feeling and we just go right for it and we act upon it and we feel
really good or righteous or whatever while we're doing it and we feel great about it
once we've finished and that's a really strong action, it's a full complete action whether
that's something virtuous or positive. Ideally it's positive but obviously then so that's
the extreme of like really it's a powerful karmic and then so then there's other combinations
we could think of. If something comes up we don't want to do it or do it to our mistakes
or our laziness or our whatever. We do it but we're not really into it when we're doing
it and we don't feel good after we do it. You know what I mean? It's still strong but
maybe it's not. Or like there's examples about like say being generous but the reason you're
being generous is so people will think well of you. Right. You know or raises your status
to the community and you're a donor. Do you know what I mean? So then the karma really
gets very mixed up in terms of it's positive but it's not really maybe it's even more
negative than positive because of your motivation. It's conflicting and it's mixed. So we might
have a positive action and with that action we actually go towards neutral and even negative
depending on how we do that. I think just from what you said Liah just reminded me of something
you said about how important it is after we've done something good and positive to really
reflect on that and like oh that was a really good thing. I'm just saying this because it's
something I forget to do and I feel like it's really important to do. It's really, oh that
was something really good like acknowledging that you did that. It's a good thing and really
aspiring to do it again. And just thinking about that process you know like the positive
as we're trying to cultivate that in our practice and you know just really to reflect on that
oh wow that you know even a little thing that was something good. You want to be careful
not to veer into the hole that was something good. Great. Wow. It's a charitable kind of
thing. I think you're making a good distinction when you need to. Acknowledging. Yeah. Acknowled
ging
with that being. And acknowledging too just shows too the power of when we acknowledge
our mistakes to the other direction. When we acknowledge that someone else has done something.
Yes. That piece of the acknowledgement and the karmic effect of that. It's like oh really
it's so wonderful. Yeah. Rejoice. Has this energy and they're putting it into it. They're
you know they're giving of themselves. It feels like, oh I'm sorry. It feels a little
bit like this is starting to go into the second topic. Yeah please. I'll just read the particular
intro sentence. Your present mind has a cause and it has conditions and it will continue
without interruption until you retain enlightenment. I had a specific question if anyone wanted
to speak more to it about you know it talks about how the mind has the causes and conditions
and then it says until you retain enlightenment. And I guess maybe if we parse out more of
the definition of mind and why is it that the mind is considered part of enlightenment
because that's one of those things where at first I remember when we first came to this
book and we were discussing it last year I kind of went wait what? Like the mind's gone.
Okay. Someone tell me what that's like. If someone could speak more to that. Well I'll
jump in a little bit. First of all it says your present mind. That's a good distinction.
Yeah right. So you know we do purification practice. So what do we purify? You know we're
talking about the different ways that we behave in the world as a result of our thoughts.
So it's just this process of cultivating more positive thoughts and actions. Right? So at
some point the causes and conditions just simply stop arising. And that's like the totality
of a path. But at some point there's no more karma. Okay? So at that point then one has
total awareness from the absolute view. I have to be careful how I say that. Yeah. But
it's a different state of mind. It is the natural state of mind. So it's kind of like
you know we know that. We've discussed this a lot. That we're just working towards opening
that Buddha nature, that awareness, that true state of mind. And that particular state of
mind has no causes and conditions. That is pure. I don't know if that helps. Well that
does it. And this part of this depends on what level of teachings, like the answer of
what is mind and what is the absolute state and what is the nature. Even what is the nature.
Because the first sentence of the first topic, which is really kind of bam, meditation practice
reveals our true nature as being totally perfect and complete. Which even though we've heard
that a lot, but it says we have a true nature, that nature is perfectly perfect and complete
and we reveal that. Basically what determines what is virtuous or unvirtuous is whether
or not it leads us to the understanding that our true nature is totally perfect and complete
and we see that. So you mentioned like Buddha nature and you know the causes and conditions
of mind. Well from a certain level of the Mahayana teachings the mind would be mind,
consciousness, all these other things. They talk about the eight consciousnesses and aggregates
and all those different things. But Buddha nature, like the cause of the whole shabang,
samsara and nirvana, I mean ultimately is like they say throughout the chapter, continuity.
Continuity of awareness, like the continuity of mind. Buddha nature recognizing, you know,
making the six realms, you know, I mean in a certain sense just the ongoing experience.
Like one master here said you'll never be out of, someone was concerned about death.
Basically they were afraid of dying. He said oh don't worry, don't worry. You'll always
exist in the universe in some way. But his point was continuity of experience. Or like
Robert Thurmond, it was interesting when he just once little fun thing. He said when I
was translating the Tibetan book of the dead, you know, as it's commonly known or he said
you know I came to an interesting conclusion while translating the Tibetan book of the
dead. There are no dead people. He's like maybe everyone else already knows that. But
it's ongoing. So it depends on how you define death. You know, if by death you mean mind
is ended, Buddha nature is ended, awareness no longer experiences. So I'm sorry Nirvana.
Then by that, that doesn't exist, you know, because it doesn't end. It just keeps going,
you know. But I don't know. Anyway, I just like this.
Let's kind of think of that goes right into the third point, so I don't know if you want to go
there.
You know what I'm talking about.
So that's the rest of the second point too. Not the river continuing.
It definitely so here that that mind is related directly. The mind that continues until you
attain alignment. So that's definitely this distinction they made in the first chapter.
This book taming mind. There's conditioned mind. There's unconditioned awareness is two things.
Conditioned mind has karma. That karma can either be negative or positive. So there's
negative karma, positive karma, and mind that's not affected by karma. Three things.
So what we're trying to do is not create more negative karma. Actually do good things
with good intention. Even if we're holding anything, it's karmic because there's a
sense of I holding. It's karmic. There's mistake happening there, me doing something.
But if it's positive, it leads towards the lessening of negative karma, the increasing
of positive karma, which is called accumulation of merit, which then actually leads into
the wisdom or like how the mind is when it's not affected by karma. So in the end, like
you said, it leads towards the absolute state or the mind of enlightenment, mind beyond
karma. That is like how the mind is when it's no longer influenced by karma. So that's
enlightenment when literally all the causes suffering or all the grasping totally eliminated.
But then they also said in that first chapter, we can have moments of being an awareness
that's not influenced by karma. And so one way of looking at this too is like how Rinpoche
said, right at the beginning of this, like to connect with that nature that's not influenced
by karma, that's right here, right now, the Buddha nature, and then reveal its qualities
by not having the grasping come up at the same time. So non grasping awareness. So it's
not as if mind just out like you said, end of mind over game over, you know, but it's
like end of grasping dualistic suffering mind, like, and all the oppositional circumstances
that that produces, and then just open receptive, inclusive awareness, that doesn't have any
particular fixation or something like that. That's the path is to change the condition
of karma to where we're trying to eliminate the negative aspects of it that arise in the
mind and to make it to a pure state where it is just a positive flow and then it doesn't
take a form because it is just one continuous. Or just that whole practice of accumulating
wisdom and accumulate merit. And in a way, like we've talked about it many times in Rinpoche's
too, how like that aspect of accumulating merit is in a way positive grasping. For sure.
Creating positive conditions into which to move on the path towards totally ripening
up our primary nature. As we become more and more familiar with that.
But I'd say in the end too, it doesn't mean that the form part ends, like just because
I mean, it goes through these chapter, just because we die and the body dies and then
it's just mind. That awareness always has an energy or an expressive capacity. It's
always form and emptiness, emptiness and form, like a core foundation of Mahayana teaching.
So it's not as if awareness ever happens without any kind of expression, even if that's a really,
really subtle expression of mind or thought or something like that. It still emanates.
So even a Buddha, like enlightened mind here, it doesn't mean that all of a sudden there's
zero body or form and then it's just some disembodied mind. But that mind then will
have a capacity to spontaneously express itself in ways that are helpful and that can take
the appearances of forms and all kinds of shapes and sizes and the condition has been
changed to a positive aspect of it. It doesn't, the negative aspect of karma doesn't appear
there because it's not necessary. Yeah, the negative is certainly gone. Then it can be
just pure expression or like wholly, wholly positive expression or something. Unkarmic,
wholly positive, super-cadro-fragilistic. Yeah, I think that's a really important point too
in terms of making sure that the absolute is not equated with blankness, but that there's
always going to be some manifestation. That, you know, the Orm Caias are always there with
the Dharma Caya. There's going to be, it's just like some expression or some manifestation
is going to continue to happen and so we don't sort of think that we're trying to get to
some place where there's no perception and there's no activity and no anything. That's
not the goal. And that's impossible. That's, I mean, that's totally like you said, like
we're always relational beings. We're always related, you know, there's no point where
we'll, you know, like someone said, it's like we're all like kind of locked in an elevator
together forever. So we might as well get along with each other, that sort of thing. But
I mean, I'm sorry. It's a, it's a, it's a, but the, but the point is like, even if you
recognize that there's no like rippages here, these labels, me, I, mine, you, me, this,
I'm sorry, nirvana, like even if you, like you said, grasping mind is what, is enlightenment
is no more grasping mind. That's a simple way of putting it. No more grasping to the
label of you and me and like, cause otherwise it can sound like, you know, like the state
of nothingness or like for the bodhisattva perspective, like, oh, that's a lot of work,
you know, like, but you're always relating, you're always going to be in this form with
an energetic component of mind and it's going to be bouncing off, you know, it's going to
be affecting things and things are going to be affecting it in a certain sense. So it's
like, we can't, I think that we, you know, they say we have eternalism and nihilism are
two such big habits, you know, that we have like nihilism, they define it as different
things, but the wish for this to end, the wish for, I'm sorry, you know, for the troubles
and the difficulties to like, just be over, just end, just black out, you know, just whatever,
or the wish that, the wish that we last forever, that our good circumstances could last forever.
But I think, you know, non-grasping mind of enlightenment is beyond all those extremes,
you know, that's what they say, all the labels and so it's not like, now I will attain
enlightenment
and that sense of like, well the enlightenment is recognizing that this grasping to the sense
of I-ness as a separate thing that's not relational or that is what has dropped, you know.
That's kind of interesting.
I had a wonderful loan pretty much saying, but very close to what you're saying is over
on page nine in here, something, if you look on page nine, it's the second full paragraph,
the I, quote unquote, exists when we start to form attachments. The I, again, quote unquote,
is nothing other than the grasping itself. I love that word, it's the grasping itself.
That would just sound like such a, love that part of it.
And they sneak it in here even in this first topic we already discussed.
Of all of our concepts, the notions of having a body, speech and mind are always with us.
So here, even talking about body, speech, mind and these things, they too are ways
that we're constantly holding, our mind is constantly holding what it feels that it is.
So strong, like, and they say these are things, three things sentient beings always have,
body, speech, mind. So that's interesting, but they're here, they're just concepts too.
So this is little Mahayana, I mean, this shows it's a Mahayana for sure.
They've already established Buddha nature, and here they're establishing too, it's all mind.
I mean the way of phrasing it specifically is that kind of a philosophical position.
Anne, when you were talking, you used the word perception, and what came to my mind is,
and I think we were discussing this in our study group that was in between these two,
and that was, in Rinpoche's book, they said to refine our perceptions.
Is that right? That struck me so strongly, because we have such a misperception of this reality.
And part of this process of the conditioned mind moving towards the awakened mind,
knowing, if we can say it that way, is refining our perception.
And that kind of, like, tickles me. It's like, oh, that's interesting.
It's a different way for me to look at this than I've ever looked at it before.
And it happens so much through organization practice, right, that we begin to see things
differently.
These are not as they appear.
I don't understand what that means, to refine your perception.
What would that look like?
So, Kendra, which we said in the Nine Golden Chariots,
it was like the end of the chapter on samsara, question and answer,
and he said, part of the path is we need to refine our perceptions and conceptions.
He was defining absolute and relative truth.
It's not as if we can just go into absolute truth, because if we could, we would have done it.
Actually, I have to work with relative truth, and how we work with it is like having more accurate
conceptions,
more functional, inclusive conceptions, perceptions, and that leads towards non-conception.
So, that refining.
So, I was just going to mention, because we talk about enlightenment and what's on the other side.
But here we are, right?
Maybe it is I.
Most of us have all these issues.
So, to me, the whole idea is you have to do practice, right?
To open the doors to be able to get there, right?
And they talk in the mirror about having a map and having a destination.
And we can sit here and intellectualize what we think is that state.
We've spent a lot of time doing that.
More that we can think, okay, it was that I can do, and to Liah's point, you build a merit.
That's probably what opens the doors, and you have to have a leap of faith.
And if you build merit, things will happen, and you'll start to perceive things differently.
Not because you're trying to do it, but you're presented with what you really already have, right?
So, it's not so much trying so hard.
So, the idea is when thoughts come to, we talk about grasping, and visualizing a thought coming,
and not acting on it without thinking, and just doing things, and whatever happens happens.
But say, oh, let me just take a moment and recognize that this thought is coming by,
and do we give it power?
Like Liah said, do we act on this?
Do we give it more power, more power, more power?
Spend our week just totally focused on this thought.
Or do we say, that's kind of interesting.
Say, what's next?
And you kind of do that, and that gives you a little experience of not grasping.
It may be very limited, but it gives us a practice that says, okay, I'm going to start to see what
it feels like to not grasp.
And you do that, and then you mindfully do positive things.
And then you think, I'm not doing that.
I'm not grasping it.
It goes, oh, what a great thing.
I just did.
But you say, hey, this is, you know, I'm building this mirror, and this mirror is the key.
This is the key, and it's not just my key.
It's everybody's.
And you build it.
You share it with everybody else, and we all move to a point.
And all of a sudden, the things appear, the fog lifts, and you see something.
Not because you willed it to happen.
You know, you just relax and allow what's actually there to show itself.
So that thing to me is like, it's helpful for me to understand what practices can I do that will
help me get there.
Because I really don't have a clue about what's out there.
I can think about it all day.
I can read a lot of books, and I do, and it's important.
But walking into a building you've never been in is different than looking at it in a picture.
You know, touching it, and feeling it, and being part of it as part of this.
So it's interesting to me that they do talk about that.
You can think about it, but you're not going to just jump from, oh, I get it, and I'm going to walk
over, and there I am.
It takes work.
It seems like that's a lot of, like, that whole point of refining.
Like, I mean, it's only one level of, like, examining reality.
And then there's all the non-yanas of exploring reality and becoming more familiar with how it is.
According to the capacities of how we see, and each level refines a little more.
And we're actually using our faculty of intellect to really examine our assumptions.
And according to that level, look at reality.
And we're using those tools.
We have all this study and instructions.
And then, too, that whole balance between just thinking of our prep, you know, hearing, reading.
And then we're all discussing and thinking about, and then there's our actual meditation practice.
Those three study, contemplation, meditation.
I mean, I'm just thinking of what I'm thinking about, saying what I'm thinking about.
It's not a point or anything.
It just seems like the beginning of refinement, for me, is to be mindful of your own thought.
If you can be mindful of that, that, to me, is the beginning of refinement, because then things
will start to change.
And you're refining, and you're thinking, and you're meeting things.
And like that whole, I mean, it's beautiful, too, just that whole first chapter in here is on t
aming the mind.
And then leading into this next.
So it's just interesting looking at that progression, too.
And Rick, what kind of progression?
The progression in the way the chapter goes, from chapter one, looking at taming the mind.
And then those parts, and then looking at causes and conditions of that mind.
And then kind of how this, you know, the conscientiousness, alertness, mindfulness.
That's such a critical, it seems like that's what you're talking about.
Just a critical point of being aware of what's coming up.
So you're kind of polishing and doing some things, and that's at least a start.
You know, and I'm not sure what's going to happen next, but I don't really care so much.
It's like, it's the roller coaster, even if you're starting to go down the hill, and you're just
relaxing.
[laughter]
I had a comment about one thing you said that was that the leap of faith of accumulating of merit.
But I don't, I mean, and maybe it is to begin.
To begin anything is a leap of faith, to some extent.
But as far as when you're actually accumulating merit, in your, like you said, in your mind,
you are refining that, you know, your perception through mindfulness, alertness, conscientiousness.
And you're accumulating virtuous things, like in this first point, which means you're moving
towards something.
But, you know, Buddhism says there is good and there is bad.
Good is, I mean, from one level, one level of the teachings.
And at that level it says that the nature is actually good.
That's the actual, what the Buddha said when he attained enlightenment.
Whoa! You know, the nature is freedom. The nature is freedom.
So he's like, everybody wants to be happy, that's what Buddhism always says, and Tibet Buddhism
always says, every time.
The basis of the whole thing, everybody wants to be happy, people don't want suffering.
And the nature is actually the freedom state.
So the leap of faith, I think, in this case, is just trying it out, like trying it out, beginning.
Like, see, what is mindfulness like? Like, really, what is it like, you know?
And that's like moment to moment, try to engage in that, and then you might find, you know, I mean,
like we all will.
Oh wow, like, the leap of faith gets less and less and less and less.
As the grasping diminishes and one travels the path, there's less and less faith in the sense of
you don't have to take anyone's word for it.
It's going to define what you mean by faith right now.
Faith, and faith meaning, like, you have to believe in something that you don't experience yourself
.
Because by following the path, you will experience that.
And when you do virtuous activities, you'll have many friends.
And, you know, when you have good motivation, like, you'll have friends, you'll have good
circumstances.
It doesn't mean bad things can't happen to good people.
But that's based on Kama, how we've been doing this since beginning this time.
Things are coming up and we're purifying things in all different circumstances.
But I guess I just mean that, like, the Buddha always said, some teachings says,
"I'm asking you to believe what's in this palm of my hand."
But that is not my teaching, this is not the Dharma. This is the Dharma.
That hand is open. You look, I mean, the Buddha, he said that.
You must examine that for yourself, like an open palm, you know?
You see that for yourself, don't take my word for it.
Like we said, I think last week, maybe, you have to examine the teachings as a goldsmith examines
gold, cutting, rubbing, you know...
Yeah, it becomes experiential. I think you have more and more...
And that reinforces you as you see that.
Yeah, it's like a momentum.
That point is exactly what is in this fourth point.
I mean, you keep kind of going around it.
I just wanted to say, I really like what you said, Doug, because, like,
it's like you're saying, let's take the foreignness out of this practice.
Like, I'm going to read these books and, like, look at...
All of this just ties well together. Look at the map and not go in the building or whatever, you
know?
But you just really touch it. You get into it.
And then we have this, like, we take our understanding for what we read in the book and we develop
that and we work on that.
And it's not just this pie in the sky ideal that we just never engage in, you know?
So maybe I'll just read the point you have to use.
"Just knowing about emptiness is not enough to stop reincarnation.
Mere intellectual understanding is not realization.
According to Buddhism, understanding and realization are different.
We may understand something, but we have to experience it to gain realization.
For example, if we look at a map, we can know something about the place we're going, but it doesn't
mean that we're there.
If we go there, we will experience something quite different from what is on the map.
For learning from a map is very helpful.
Similarly, understanding emptiness is the first stage of realizing the true nature of the mind."
So does that mean that in order to realize that you don't have to be on the boomies?
On the boomies?
I don't think so. I think here there'd be this...
Why would you think so?
Well, because realization, there's an understanding, an experience of emptiness.
Yeah. So first boomy would mean you're no longer forced to karmically be embodied in samsara.
So you're free of samsara in first boomy. So that would be enlightenment in that bodhisattva
context.
Yeah.
But first boomy is when you fully understand emptiness.
No, when you fully realize it. We should just keep the terms straight here.
It's good. Experience, understand, realize, or intellectually understand, experience that meaning a
little bit,
and then realization is stably, uninterruptedly abiding in that realization.
So we intellectually understand what it is, then we actually experience it, and then we always
experience it.
At least for that particular thing, then we have realization of that particular meaning or
something.
So I think we can have experiences. We can have glimpses. We can have moments when things are clear
.
That's different from realization.
Right. In terms of the realization is defined as stability.
It is that way. And so what was your question again?
I was wondering if realization, if you can't have realization without being on the boomies.
I see. I think that if it's defined as stability, it's got to be that way.
And the answer is it depends on how you define realization.
No, because it's a really interesting point. From the sutra perspective,
they say that you don't have a direct experience of emptiness until you're on the boomies.
And then from a vashriyana level perspective, they say that because they're specific skillful means
practices,
like, for example, receiving empowerment from a great realized being,
they can provide such a special set of totally balanced conditions
that that skillful mean particular to the vashriyana
can actually help us have a direct realization of emptiness in that moment.
Whereas the sutra perspective doesn't think that's possible.
You have to stably be on the boomies to have that.
The vashriyana perspective says that is possible.
If you use with this certain motivation, in the presence of a vashri master,
everything's set up properly, then that direct realization is possible.
But it still has to be stabilized. There's no way around that.
They would say, I mean, I don't know what we're going to call it.
Maybe to keep you in the terms, will we say experience of that realization
or experience of emptiness, maybe?
Or the way I've heard it talk like, even say in terms of nature of mind practice,
you can directly experience nature of mind through vashriyana,
but that doesn't mean you're on the first boomie.
Do you know what I mean?
It's just that skillful means allow you to start to experience that more and more and more.
But it's not the same thing as first boomie.
Be careful, because you think you can see the nature, that doesn't mean you have attained
realization.
So there are really different things.
But the vashriyana does have these skillful means,
so that we can train in zotian and start to experience that directly.
So when you're using, you actually would say realization is different from having a monetary
experience.
That's the way that I've heard it.
In terms of like a zotian or Mahamudra context, it's a different thing.
Because you can still be having that direct experience.
That would be the experience of a realized being, but it's not stable yet.
So it takes quite a while.
[laughter]
So it's interesting, you keep using the word stable.
I've always thought about it as being completely integrated.
That one, at that point of realization, would see the emptiness completely and totally,
and it not come and go.
But I've always just thought of it in terms of being fully integrated.
But maybe using the word integrated, then there's still a sense of body-mind.
I don't know, I'm just kind of thinking out loud here.
Because I had never thought of it in terms of stabilization before, not that way.
But it makes perfect sense, it really does.
You'd stably have an experience of emptiness?
It would just be uninterrupted.
If anger arose, I guess that you would see the emptiness in the entire situation
in such a way that it would not draw you in.
Do you understand what I mean?
I don't have that experience.
Maybe you're saying with integration you can think of it as that idea that form is always there
with emptiness.
There is an integration in the sense that it's not like you're just having an experience isolated.
But it's always integrated with the manifestation or the expressions that are happening.
In your moment-to-moment life, like they teach you to say,
waking the daytime experiences, the nighttime experiences, the dream experiences,
when you maintain the uninterrupted awareness of the nature of mind
throughout all those experiences, then you're completely enlightened.
Like I heard a vocal organ of one of his grandmother.
She said, in conversation with her teacher one time of her realization,
she said, "Well, that's a special story."
We only have a few minutes to say.
She said four minutes.
She said she missed for a couple of moments right after she fell asleep.
She lost recognition of the nature of mind.
And then she instantly regained it before the dream started.
So maybe we've touched on this third point, the concept of the idea of death.
We're going to die. It's coming. We don't know when.
But we kind of really haven't done it.
And it's so good to look at it.
Is there any way that anyone has something that they'd like to share about that?
We have about a minute and then we have to do meditation.
So now's your chance.
Death.
I did touch on it earlier.
In terms of Robert Thurman talking about how the more he works with the bharga-tudha,
he realized he'd never.
There is really no death because that continuity of experience or awareness
is always ongoing, although it's hard to see that.
What we see is the body's dead and the consciousness is not there.
I like this. Just in this quote here that it's talking about,
it's because the body is composed of the five elements
and the mind is not composed of the five elements.
So then the elements are changing. They're constantly changing.
And they have these natural patterns and transitions of birth, death, and death.
We can tease it out into further patterns, but at least the big ones, birth and death.
The mind is not susceptible to those changes.
The mind is not the form of aggregate.
The body and the material is the form of aggregate.
The duality mind is totally susceptible to change.
Our habits constantly change.
But it's non-habituated, unconditioned, non-grasping mind or awareness.
That doesn't change.
But otherwise habitual mind is like that, that, that, that, that, that.
Monkey mind, you know? So that changes all the time.
So would you say, in here, there's a five element,
and then what would you say the mind is made of if it's not the five elements?
It's uncom pounded.
Uncompounded? It would be habit patterns?
Not wisdom awareness, but habitual awareness.
Because it seems like that would go back to the point that was highlighted earlier
about the difference between the conditioned mind and then that open awareness
kind of from the first chapter, it seems.
So, yeah, I mean, definitely I think what Dropa was talking about was that, you know,
that conditioned mind, you know, that one monkey mind has the,
has all the karma patterns that make it tick and work and go.
But then that awareness, like, particularly, again,
to say it's that uncommounted, not influenced by karma,
and not particularly drawn or grasping.
I think in Abhidharma, there's, everything's divided in either matter or consciousness.
So mind is consciousness.
Like those habit patterns are part of consciousness.
So it's that, in terms of existence, there's those basic two types.
So then, what does and what doesn't die?
What dies?
Body dies.
What doesn't die?
Come on.
What kind of mind?
Okay, there's a mind.
Okay.
Do you have something there?
Just, I mean, I can't just, it's not, just looking at the 12 links again.
I mean, it's more looking at the chapter.
And since I was in Abhidharma, she is talking about mind and thoughts
and moments of thoughts, and then he takes it to lifetimes
and birth and death, as though that's, but then the way it all,
and then later in the conversation, how we're going to, like,
emptiness realization as things are rising.
But that whole, I mean, just taking the way every,
this is so beautiful, the way the 12 links can apply to so many levels,
just like in the chapter here in the way, of to, like, whole lifetime to lifetime.
Instantaneous little moments of perception, how it's all, and all of this,
that's all the conditionality happening within this.
But that conditionality is part of that consciousness.
Dualistic consciousness.
So they say, in the 12 links, if we have non-grasping wisdom awareness,
how does that fit in with the 12 links?
They say that that's when we recognize how our mind is before there's any ignorance.
It knows itself.
And so the first link doesn't start, and none of the rest of them start either.
So in that moment, we stop right at the root of samsara.
It doesn't arise at all.
But then if we still have karma that's from past,
then we have to keep recognizing the source of that karma.
So that's non-grasping mind is recognized before the first link.
And then otherwise we have, there's no other way we can go through the samsara.
It goes back to what Doug was saying.
I thought, I really liked what you said about how we have that experience of practicing non-grasp
ing.
You know, this thought comes up, and we just choose not to grasp it.
And that's really cutting the link right there.
It becomes experiential at that point.
Just thinking about it.
And that's the real practice there, is actually not grasping.
I think a lot of them have that.
Can we practice that for 15 seconds?
Is that okay?
Thank you.